[[Today I Learned]]
- [[Automate the Boring Stuff]]
	- [Backtracking and Tree Traversal Algorithms](https://inventwithpython.com/recursion/chapter4.html)
		- queues, weighted graphs
			- traversal strategies
			- recursive process
			- shortest path to a node
		- tour guide
			- https://code.pyret.org/editor#share=1RvlKmzfqD2UfzJ32mCvH__b7Kslx9C3w&v=be0f222
			- [[Dijkstra's Algorithm]]
- Here is the story. Today, I tried to pick up some probability theory reading a textbook, but I was frustrated by my learning process: rereading the chapter and taking notes.
- begging engineers who are very good at debugging to understand that the same exact meta-skill can be used on people. You can crack people, you can predict them with extreme accuracy. You are smart, you are very smart. You can do this [[@DefenderOfBasic]]
	- I can predict how I am going to behave as a math beginner. Which mistakes do I  frequently make? How can I fix them? Why is this person behaving like they are drunk? 
		- In [[The Inner Game of Tennis]], the author shows a technique called non-judgmental observation to improve your play.
		- in [[The Design of Everyday Things]] there is a chapter called "Human Error? No, Bad Design". Why am I behaving so irrationally? No, I can redesign the math so that the mistake won't happen again!
			- How does a professional mathematician interact with the math compared to a complete beginner?
				- [[Gilbert Strang]] demonstrates his thought process very well in his [[Linear Algebra]] lectures at MIT. [[Neel Nanda]] does this as well.
		- Basically, you are [[Prompt Engineering]] or having a conversation with *yourself*. Can you predict how you are going to respond? Are you going to respond with confusion? You are both the reader and the writer! Expose yourself to different kinds of math. How do you react? Are you delighted by it or indifferent to it?
		- We can reduce the number of mistakes we make! We can write better onboarding guides! We can write github issues to improve upon them!!
		- > Insanity is doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different results.
		- What do they see that make them act like this? Which belief influences their decision-making process?
		- As so often in mathematics, the importance of the problem lies in where it leads the mind, rather than in the problem itself.