---
title: "Influencer Economy interview by Ryan Williams | Derek Sivers"
source: "https://sive.rs/2015-11-influencer"
author:
published: 2015-11-05
created: 2025-01-26
description:
tags:
  - "clippings"
---
Right, exactly, and I was complaining and I said, “Well I have to do this, and I have to do that,” and he said, “Well, you don’t have to do anything.” I said, “Uhh yeah, I do. I have to pay my employees, I have to pay my taxes, I have to ship out orders when customers pay for them. I have to do this.” And he said, “No. You don’t have to do this.” I said, “Yes I do.” He said, “No hold on. I’m not gonna let this go. You need to understand this. You gotta make sure that you remember that you don’t have to do anything. If you don’t do it there are consequences, but you don’t actually have to do anything. You could right now just disappear and go to Bali and not tell anyone your phone number, and stop answering your mail, and disappear!” He said, “There will be consequences, like when you returned the US there might- your employees would quit, your company would lose some reputation, some people would tell their credit card companies that their order was never shipped and the credit card companies would penalize you for not shipping it. There might be couple lawsuits when you get back for employees that feel you owe them money for time that they worked and you didn’t pay them, but you actually can just disappear if you don’t mind the consequences. Or if you’re willing to pay the consequences. And he said, “You need to always make sure, no matter what happens in your life, that you know that you don’t have to do anything. You are the boss of your life at all times. Even paying taxes! Yeah the government will charge you interest and come after you to eventually pay it, but yeah! You could even skip-out on paying your taxes for 5 years if you really don’t want to for some reason, you just have to pay it eventually. Or go to jail for a while.” You know? So I think this is a really important thing for anybody listening, that we all have the tendency to often feel trapped, you know? Trapped in a relationship, trapped in a company, trapped in a job. It’s a good reminder to know that you don’t have to do anything.